Outlined and Rephrased 7.6 Release Notes (in a standardized docs-y way) (#21423)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/release/notes.md

Read more on convention plugins here().

#### Revised dependencies for Maven conversions from `implementation` to `api`

The `init` task now adds compile-time Maven dependencies to Gradle's `api` configuration when converting a Maven project. This sharply reduces the number of compilation errors resulting from the automatic conversion utility. See the [Build Init Plugin](userguide/build_init_plugin.html#sec:pom_maven_conversion) for more information.

#### Introduced network timeout configuration for wrapper download 

It is now possible to configure the network timeout for downloading the wrapper files.
The default value is 10000ms and can be changed in several ways:

From the command line:
```shell
gradle wrapper --network-timeout=30000
```

In your build scripts or convention plugins:
```kotlin
tasks.wrapper {
    networkTimeout.set(30000)
}
```

Or in `gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.properties`:
```properties
networkTimeout=30000
```

See the [user manual](userguide/gradle_wrapper.html#sec:adding_wrapper) for more information.

#### Introduced flag for individual task `rerun` 

> A new built-in `--rerun` option is now available for every task. The effect is similar to `--rerun-tasks`, but it forces a rerun only on the specific task to which it was directly applied. For example, you can force tests to run ignoring up-to-date checks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every task can now use the `--rerun` option. This option works like `--rerun-tasks`,
except `--rerun` only effects a single task. For example, you can force tests to
ignore up-to-date checks like this:
```

```
gradle test --rerun
```

See the [documentation](userguide/command_line_interface.html#sec:builtin_task_options) for more information.

<a name="configuration"></a>
### Configuration

The [configuration cache](userguide/configuration_cache.html) improves build time by caching the result of the configuration phase and reusing this for subsequent builds.

#### Extendend configuration cache task compatibility

The `dependencies`, `buildEnvironment`, `projects` and `properties` tasks are now compatible with the configuration cache.

#### Clarified attribute ordering for `resolvableConfigurations` reports  

> The `resolvableConfigurations` reporting task will now print the order that [attribute disambiguation rules](userguide/variant_attributes.html#sec:abm_disambiguation_rules) will be checked when resolving project dependencies.  These rules are used if multiple variants of a dependency are available with different compatible values for a requested attribute, and no exact match.  Disambiguation rules will be run on all attributes with multiple compatible matches in this order to select a single matching variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attribute disambiguation rules control the variant of a dependency selected by
Gradle when:
- multiple variants of a dependency exist with different compatible values for a
  requested attribute
- no variant exactly matches that attribute

Attribute disambiguation rules select a single matching dependency variant in
such cases. The `resolvableConfigurations` reporting task now prints the order
of these rules.

To learn more, see [attribute disambiguation rules](userguide/variant_attributes.html#sec:abm_disambiguation_rules).
```

## New features and usability improvements

<a name="developer-productivity"></a>
### Developer Productivity

#### Added support for incremental compilation following a compilation failure

Gradle already supports [Java incremental compilation](userguide/java_plugin.html#sec:incremental_compile) by default and [Groovy incremental compilation](userguide/groovy_plugin.html#sec:incremental_groovy_compilation) as an opt-in experimental feature.

In previous versions after a compilation failure the next compilation was not incremental but a full recompilation instead.

With this version, Java and Groovy incremental compilation will work incrementally also after a failure.

This improves experience with compilation when working iteratively on some Java or Groovy code, e.g. when iteratively running compile or test tasks from an IDE.

> #### Relocated convention plugins in projects generated with `init` (incubating)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Relocated convention plugins in projects generated with `init`

> 🐣 *This feature is incubating*.

```

> 🐣 *This feature is incubating*.

When generating builds using the `init` task and opting in to using incubating features, convention plugins are now located in an included build under the `gradle/plugins` directory instead of in `buildSrc`.

Read more on convention plugins here().

> #### Revised dependencies for Maven conversions from `implementation` to `api`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Revised dependencies generated by Maven conversions from `implementation` to `api`
```

It is now possible to configure the network timeout for downloading the wrapper files.
The default value is 10000ms and can be changed in several ways:

From the command line:
```shell
gradle wrapper --network-timeout=30000
```

In your build scripts or convention plugins:
```kotlin
tasks.wrapper {
    networkTimeout.set(30000)
}
```

Or in `gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.properties`:
```properties
networkTimeout=30000
```

See the [user manual](userguide/gradle_wrapper.html#sec:adding_wrapper) for more information.

#### Introduced flag for individual task `rerun` 

Every task can now use the `--rerun` option. This option works like `--rerun-tasks`,
except `--rerun` only effects a single task. For example, you can force tests to
ignore up-to-date checks like this:
```
gradle test --rerun
```

See the [documentation](userguide/command_line_interface.html#sec:builtin_task_options) for more information.

<a name="configuration"></a>
### Configuration

The [configuration cache](userguide/configuration_cache.html) improves build time by caching the result of the configuration phase and reusing this for subsequent builds.

> #### Extendend configuration cache task compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Extended configuration cache task compatibility
```

The `dependencies`, `buildEnvironment`, `projects` and `properties` tasks are now compatible with the configuration cache.

> #### Clarified attribute ordering for `resolvableConfigurations` reports  

Reviewer 2: This isn't clarifying the attribute ordering, that remains the same and is printed the same (alphabetically) in this report.  It's clarifying the order that disambiguation rules will be run if they are needed.  Perhaps:

"Clarified the order disambiguation rules will be checked when multiple compatible attributes exist in `resolvableConfigurations` report"

That's also a mouthful, but there is a very specific use case when this will be helpful.

Reviewer: How about:

```suggestion
#### Clarified the ordering of disambiguation rule checks in `resolvableConfigurations` reports  
```
Slightly less of a mouthful, but I'm not 100% sure if this is true. I get the sense that "when multiple compatible attributes exist" is the only time when this *matters*, but technically the disambiguation rules apply in all cases.

Would this reword be OK? Or should I use the longer rewording that you suggested above?
@tresat 

Thanks!

Reviewer 2: That's correct, and sounds fine to me.

(#): Attribute disambiguation precedence
```

#### TODO: Extendend configuration cache support for external processes 
[Allow buildScan.background to launch external processes with configuration cache enabled gradle#20536](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/20536)

#### TODO: Extendend configuration cache support for internal plugin

[Allow buildScan.background to launch external processes with configuration cache enabled gradle#20536](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/20536)

<a name="execution"></a>
### Execution

#### Introduced ability to explain why a task was skipped with a message

> It is now possible to provide a reason message in conditionally disabling a task using a [`Task.onlyIf` predicate](userguide/more_about_tasks.html#sec:using_a_predicate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now provide a reason message when conditionally disabling a task using a [`Task.onlyIf` predicate](userguide/more_about_tasks.html#sec:using_a_predicate).
```

```groovy

> tasks.named("slowBenchmark") {
>     onlyIf("slow benchmarks are enabled with my.build.benchmark.slow") { 
>         providers.gradleProperty("my.build.benchmark.slow").map { it.toBoolean() }.getOrElse(false)
>     }
> }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
tasks.register("slowBenchmark") {
    def slowBenchmarksEnabled = providers.gradleProperty("my.build.benchmark.slow").map { it.toBoolean() }.orElse(false)
    onlyIf("slow benchmarks are enabled with my.build.benchmark.slow") { 
        slowBenchmarksEnabled.get()
    }
}
```

`named` requires that the `slowBenchmark` task already exists. 

Accessing the gradle property in the onlyIf is invisible to configuration caching and will break that in a non-obvious way.

```

> These reason messages are reported in the console with the `--info` logging level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--info` logging level outputs reason messages in the console.
```

> This might be helpful in finding out why a particular task is skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

(#): Attribute disambiguation precedence
```

#### TODO: Extended configuration cache support for external processes 
[Allow buildScan.background to launch external processes with configuration cache enabled gradle#20536](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/20536)

#### TODO: Extended configuration cache support for internal plugin

[Allow buildScan.background to launch external processes with configuration cache enabled gradle#20536](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/20536)

<a name="execution"></a>
### Execution

#### Introduced ability to explain why a task was skipped with a message

You can now provide a reason message when conditionally disabling a task using the [`Task.onlyIf` predicate](userguide/more_about_tasks.html#sec:using_a_predicate).
```groovy
tasks.register("slowBenchmark") {
    def slowBenchmarksEnabled = providers.gradleProperty("my.build.benchmark.slow").map { it.toBoolean() }.orElse(false)
    onlyIf("slow benchmarks are enabled with my.build.benchmark.slow") { 
        slowBenchmarksEnabled.get()
    }
}
```

The `--info` logging level outputs reason messages in the console.

```

> <a name="plugin"></a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<a name="plugin"></a>
```

(#): Attribute disambiguation precedence
```

#### TODO: Extended configuration cache support for external processes 
[Allow buildScan.background to launch external processes with configuration cache enabled gradle#20536](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/20536)

#### TODO: Extended configuration cache support for internal plugin

[Allow buildScan.background to launch external processes with configuration cache enabled gradle#20536](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/20536)

<a name="execution"></a>
### Execution

#### Introduced ability to explain why a task was skipped with a message

You can now provide a reason message when conditionally disabling a task using the [`Task.onlyIf` predicate](userguide/more_about_tasks.html#sec:using_a_predicate).
```groovy
tasks.register("slowBenchmark") {
    def slowBenchmarksEnabled = providers.gradleProperty("my.build.benchmark.slow").map { it.toBoolean() }.orElse(false)
    onlyIf("slow benchmarks are enabled with my.build.benchmark.slow") { 
        slowBenchmarksEnabled.get()
    }
}
```

The `--info` logging level outputs reason messages in the console.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

(#): Attribute disambiguation precedence
```

> #### TODO: Extendend configuration cache support for external processes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### TODO: Extended configuration cache support for external processes 
```

[Allow buildScan.background to launch external processes with configuration cache enabled gradle#20536](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/20536)

> #### TODO: Extendend configuration cache support for internal plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### TODO: Extended configuration cache support for internal plugin
```

[Allow buildScan.background to launch external processes with configuration cache enabled gradle#20536](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/20536)

<a name="execution"></a>
### Execution

#### Introduced ability to explain why a task was skipped with a message

You can now provide a reason message when conditionally disabling a task using the [`Task.onlyIf` predicate](userguide/more_about_tasks.html#sec:using_a_predicate).
```groovy
tasks.register("slowBenchmark") {
    def slowBenchmarksEnabled = providers.gradleProperty("my.build.benchmark.slow").map { it.toBoolean() }.orElse(false)
    onlyIf("slow benchmarks are enabled with my.build.benchmark.slow") { 
        slowBenchmarksEnabled.get()
    }
}
```

The `--info` logging level outputs reason messages in the console.

> #### Tasks can be re-run selectively

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> gradle slowBenchmark -Pmy.build.benchmark.slow=false --info

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> ```
> > Task :slowBenchmark SKIPPED
> Skipping task ':slowBenchmark' as task onlyIf 'slow benchmarks are enabled with my.build.benchmark.slow' is false.
> :slowBenchmark (Thread[included builds,5,main]) completed. Took 0.001 secs.
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

gradle myCustomTask --integer-option=123
```

#### TODO: Expanded Java Toolchain support for Service Provider Interfaces 

Provides a way for plugins to register a provider of Java Toolchain that will allow auto provisioning for any toolchain specification. Service Provider Interface (SPI) TODO: link and definition.

Related issues:

[Support "Zulu OpenJDK Discovery API" for auto provisioning toolchains gradle#19140](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/19140)

#### TODO: Enhanceced of the plugin declaration DSL from java-gradle-plugin

> This is in the public roadmap but not sure it should be?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- This is in the public roadmap but not sure it should be? -->
```

Similarly, a new Gradle property `org.gradle.debug.host` is now supported for [running the Gradle process with the debugger server](userguide/troubleshooting.html#sec:troubleshooting_build_logic) 
accepting connections via network on Java 9+.

<a name="ide"></a>
### IDE

#### Enhanced test events to distinguish between assertion and framework failures

> Gradle 7.6 introduces new failure types for the `Failure` interface returned by [`FailureResult.getFailures()`](javadoc/org/gradle/tooling/events/FailureResult.html#getFailures--): TestAssertionFailure and TestFrameworkFailure.
> IDEs can now easily distinguish between different failures using standard progress event listeners.
> Moreover, `TestAssertionFailure` exposes the expected and actual values if the used test framework supply such information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gradle 7.6 introduces new failure types for the `Failure` interface returned by
[`FailureResult.getFailures()`](javadoc/org/gradle/tooling/events/FailureResult.html#getFailures--): `TestAssertionFailure` and `TestFrameworkFailure`.
IDEs can now distinguish between assertion and framework failures using progress event listeners.
For test frameworks that expose expected and actual values, `TestAssertionFailure` contains those values.
```

#### Introduced `TestLauncher` task execution 

<!-- TODO: CHECK WORDING chanted to test below -->
<!-- TODO: I am missing the why for this and use case-->

The [`TestLauncher`](javadoc/org/gradle/tooling/TestLauncher.html) interface now allows Tooling API clients to execute any tasks along with the selected tests.

```
ProjectConnection connection = ...
connection.newTestLauncher()
          .withTaskAndTestClasses("integTest", ["org.MyTest"])
          .forTasks("startDB")
          .run()
```

> Note, that the task execution only works if the target Gradle version is >=7.6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Introduced `TestLauncher` Fine-grained test execution 

The [TestLauncher](javadoc/org/gradle/tooling/TestLauncher.html) interface now allows Tooling API clients to select test classes, methods, packages and patterns with a new API.

```
TestLauncher testLauncher = projectConnection.newTestLauncher();
testLauncher.withTestsFor(spec -> {
    spec.forTaskPath(":test")
        .includePackage("org.pkg")
        .includeClass("com.TestClass")
        .includeMethod("com.TestClass")
        .includePattern("io.*")
}).run();
```

> Note, that the new test selection interface only works if the target Gradle version is >=7.6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<a name="ide"></a>
### IDE

#### Enhanced test events to distinguish between assertion and framework failures

Gradle 7.6 introduces new failure types for the `Failure` interface returned by
[`FailureResult.getFailures()`](javadoc/org/gradle/tooling/events/FailureResult.html#getFailures--): `TestAssertionFailure` and `TestFrameworkFailure`.
IDEs can now distinguish between assertion and framework failures using progress event listeners.
For test frameworks that expose expected and actual values, `TestAssertionFailure` contains those values.

#### Introduced `TestLauncher` task execution 

<!-- TODO: CHECK WORDING chanted to test below -->
<!-- TODO: I am missing the why for this and use case-->

The [`TestLauncher`](javadoc/org/gradle/tooling/TestLauncher.html) interface now allows Tooling API clients to execute any tasks along with the selected tests.

```
ProjectConnection connection = ...
connection.newTestLauncher()
          .withTaskAndTestClasses("integTest", ["org.MyTest"])
          .forTasks("startDB")
          .run()
```

> #### Introduced `TestLauncher` Fine-grained test execution 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Introduced class, method, package, and pattern test selection via `TestLauncher`  
```

Similarly, a new Gradle property `org.gradle.debug.host` is now supported for [running the Gradle process with the debugger server](userguide/troubleshooting.html#sec:troubleshooting_build_logic)
accepting connections via network on Java 9+.

> #### Improved Java 9+ test compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> When running on Java 9+, Gradle no longer opens the `java.base/java.util` and `java.base/java.lang` JDK modules for all `Test` tasks. This can cause code to pass tests but fail at runtime.
> 
> This change may cause new test failures and warnings, depending on the Java version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - 9-15: illegal access warnings appears in logs.
> - 16+: code performing reflection on JDK internals nows fail tests.
> 
> While this change may break some existing builds, most failures are likely to uncover hidden runtime issues.
> 
> For a detailed description on how to mitigate this change, please see the [upgrade guide for details](userguide/upgrading_version_7.html#removes_implicit_add_opens_for_test_workers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
